So we've seen that the DCF deploys several smart ideas to enable a reasonable medium access control protocol with a small amount of message passing overhead. So some of those ideas have to do with exponential backoff, and also carrier sensing, the presence and absence of acknowledgment messages and using that to detect whether collisions occur, and so forth.

But it's also well known that the DCF can sometimes be inefficient, and is often unfair to certain transmitters. So the DCF can be inefficient and unfair. And part of the reason behind its inefficient and unfairness stems from the rough reality of sensing and interference in wireless networks.

The hidden node problem as we discussed before arises from the difference between the sensing range and interference range. Another set of problems arises from the fact that the sensing range is asymmetric. One transmitter receiver pair, which we call a session, a transmitter receiver pair, might be able to sense and interfere with another, but not the other way around, so only one of them might actually be able to sense the other.

An example of this problem is the flow in the middle topology, which you can see here. We have three sessions call them A, B, and C. So now B can sense the presence of A and C, but A can only sense the presence of B and C can only sense the presence of B. Additionally, A will only interfere with B's sessions and C will only interfere with B's sessions, but B will interfere with both A and C's sessions because its in interference range of both of those.

If we have to think about what would be a fair and efficient allocation here, it's not necessarily that all three of these sessions should have the same throughput because when B transmits that's causing A and C to not be able to transmit, whereas A and C can each transmit without affecting each other, so they may be able to obtain a higher throughput without causing each other to become lower throughput. So what we may find to be efficient is if A and C each have 2 times the throughput of what B has here. So if you do the math on how to create that, out of 5 parts this gets 2 out of 5, this gets 2 out of 5, and this gets 1 out of 5, A and C would each be getting 40 percent of the total throughput while B would be getting 20 percent. And again this comes from the fact that the session in the middle can sense both of the sessions on the side, so it has to be polite in waiting and listening to both of them. In contrast, either of the side sessions can only sense the middle session and has less waiting and listening to do.

But if we go by WiFi's DCF and we have each of these stations trying to transmit, each of these trying to transmit information, what we would find is that session B would be starved to near zero throughput because its going to be at a really high level of contention while A and C are going to be able to get their transmissions in lower because they only have to deal with one interfering transmitter whereas B has to deal with two. So WiFi's DCF will probably starve B to near-zero throughput.

Another example is the asymmetric sensing and interference topology you can see on this right hand side. Two sessions A and B. Session A cannot sense Session B, consequently they often collide, so a lot of times when A sends they will often be colliding, because A's transmitter sending here and B's transmitter when it sends out of its range will also interfere with A's transmission at the access point or the receiver of session A. But we don't have that problem with session B because session B's access point is outside the range of these two interfering transmitters.

In a fair allocation, given that we have both of these sessions, they should probably both be having the same throughput. But in WiFi's DCF, session A's throughput is going to be substantially less than that of session B, because when session B is making its transmissions its going to transmit and not have to worry about going through any backoff periods whereas A is going to be experiencing frequent collisions whenever B and A decide to send at the same time and therefore A is going to be at a much higher backoff stage than B is going to be.

There have been many research papers on improving WiFi DCF, mostly because its more feasible to experiment in unlicensed bands rather than licensed bands in university labs, remember that's one of the motivations behind releasing the ISM bands in the first place is that they were going to be unlicensed and allow for experimentation. For example one of the more recent improvements of DCF comes from an optimization model of CSMA parameter adaptation. Each transmitter changes its aggressiveness and channel holding duration by observing its recent throughput, balancing between the demand for capacity and the supply of allocated capacity. Researchers then study whether the distributed action without any message passing other than RTS CTS can converge to the optimal throughput for all devices. So that's one of the more complicated schemes that's being investigated, the whole idea of real time variation of throughput and channel holding durations.

So overall, the hidden node problem, the flow in the middle problem, and the asymmetric sensing topology problem are just three of the topologies that one needs to test for any one of these alternatives to CSMA to be used in today's WiFi. So if we're going to propose something we would put them to the test by seeing hey how does your scheme do under flow in the middle, how does it do under asymmetric sensing, and how does it do with the hidden node problem.

The complicated nature of sensing, in that it's imperfect and asymmetric, and of interference, also need to be carefully incorporated into the evaluation.