So let's look more now on WiFi's background. Officially, WiFi is called IEEE 802.11 because of the scheme that the IEEE uses to name their standards.

The 802 part before the dot is for Local Area Networks as opposed to Wide Area Networks, echoing the fact that this is for short range communication. And the .11 means it is for wireless communication, rather than say wireline communication like Ethernet would have a separate standard and a separate number at the end of it.

So rather than calling it IEEE 802.11 though the more attractive name of WiFi which is short for Wireless Fidelity, was coined and it stuck.

Engineers began to think seriously about WiFi in the mid-1990s as the 2G cellular industry took off. Again this is around the time also that the FCC started to release that spectrum they could use. People started wondering whether they could create an alternative type of wireless network that would have a couple of different properties.

First of all, to use the small amount of power that was allowed in the unregulated ISM frequency bands. Be mostly for short range communication, around 100 meters outdoors, which is a transmission range that is roughly one order of magnitude than that of cellulars, because you can to say up to about a kilometer for cellular away from the base station.

And to be mostly for stationary devices that are not going to move around a lot. This is what WiFi was envisioned for, and what it is still used for today.

So since many different groups began to develop technologies with these properties, there needed to be a way to ensure interoperability among them. And that's one of the downsides to not having government regulation on this, in that a lot of people can claim that they are then doing WiFi, and we need to have a way of seeing whether they actually do or not. So the WiFi Alliance was established in 1999 for this purpose, and they stamp that WiFi logo on any device that conforms to some IEEE 802.11 standard.

Those standards have come in the forms of various upgrades that have increased customers connection speeds substantially over the years. So how exactly do we quantify speed. Speed is measured in bits per second, the number of bits that are being transmitted per second. And today those are typically measured in Megabits per second, which are millions of bits per second, so the M here stands for millions.

So if we have a hundred megabits per second it means we are transmitting a hundred million bits per second. The first WiFi standard was introduced in 1997, and this is the legacy standard, and that operated in the frequency range of around 2.4 gigahertz, around the 2.4 gigahertz band. And it had a maximum transmit speed of about 1.2 megabits per second, and maybe 2 megabits per second. And again the reason for perhaps some discrepancy between numbers here is that maximum speed or the ideal speed we could call it, the theoretical ideal speed, this is all what is being obtained in theory, and not really what you are going to see in practice, because there is a whole lot of overhead that can affect this, theres collisions between the devices, theres physical layer stuff that can affect the actual speed you're going to see. So the number you see in a table like this in the spec sheets, you're never going to actually be able to get this in reality, unless you have perfectly ideal channel conditions with no interference.

So then in 1999, 802.11b was released, and that uses the 2.4 gigahertz band, and it could transmit up to 11 megabits per second. In the same year then, so this was in 1999, this is actually the first one, in that same year 1999 802.11a was then introduced, and it was able to transmit up to 54 megabits per second in the 5 gigahertz band. Then in 2003, 802.11g was introduced, and that improved the 2.4 gigahertz speed which was originally at 11 megabits per second and improved that up to 54 megabits per second. Then in 2009, 802.11n was introduced. 802.11n pushed the transmission rate to over 100 megabits per second, so more generally we can write greater than 100 Mbps, in both the 2.4 GHz and the 5 GHz bands. And most recently, in 2013, 802.11ac was introduced, and that is rated to transmit at here it's written 800 Mbps but more generally even greater than 1 gigabits per second. So greater than one thousands megabits per second, and 802.11ac in the ideal case is supposed to transmit that in the 5 Gigahertz band.

And again, these maximum rated speeds are only attainable in theory, under ideal channel conditions. Under realistic conditions you will only get a fraction of this.

So really what we've done in creating all these different WiFi standards is we've created an alphabet soup, because all these different standards just attach a different letter at the end, and also not necessarily even in chronological order. b was first, a was second, g was third, followed by n, followed by ac, and they all have different reasons for naming them these different things, um but it's kind of hard to keep track of all the different standards and exactly what frequencies they transmit at, but this is a brief history of that evolution.

The most recent standards, 802.11n 802.11ac they divide the frequency bands into smaller chunks using a technique called orthogonal frequency division multiplexing or OFDM, this is the idea of resource fragmentation where you know we take the different frequencies maybe the 2.4 GHz band and we may take whatever that spectrum is and divide it up into a lot of smaller chunks. And that's motivated by the fact that resource fragmentation can achieve better spectral efficiency because signals on smaller chunks of frequency bands can be more effectively processed, so rather than having say one signal transmitting at 2.4 GHz we can send a whole lot of different signals at smaller bands, we can get higher transmission rates. And even more recently than that, 802.11n and ac have begun to use multiple antennas on their radios, so rather than a single antenna they started to use multiple antennas to push the transmission rates into the hundreds of megabits per second and even to the gigabit per second range.

So there have also been many supplements to improve specific areas of WiFi operation, for example there is 802.11e which improved the quality of service in WiFi's medium access control, and that's actually the topic we are going to focus on in this lecture, is quality of service in the medium access control layer. 802.11h improved encryption and security, which is the major issue in the early days of WiFi. And also 802.11r improved the roaming capabilities in WiFi to support to some degree the mobility of people holding WiFi devices, again WiFi is envisioned for mostly short range communication among stationary devices, but some standards have been introduced to try to improve the quality you will get if you are actually roaming around and moving from one hotspot to the other.

And of course, there's been many improvements beyond this, but we won't have time to cover all of those. But this should give you a brief idea of the evolution of the standards of WiFi.