Let's now take a look at the way WiFi is typically deployed. This figure here shows a typical network layout. The devices are going to lie in what's called a basic service set or a BSS for short. And each basic service set contains an access point or an AP.

Now when your smartphone or your laptop searches for WiFi connectivity, it's going to send probe messages to discover which APs are in its transmission range, which access points are here, and this will result in the names you can choose from on your screen, and those are the user friendly names used to identify a service set. These names are known as service set identifiers. So each access point is going to broadcast its service set identifier.

Again, you might want to connect to an SSID, but if it's password protected your device can associate with it only if you have the password to authenticate its status, for example if you're a resident of the building if the AP is run by a building owner, or an employee of a company if its run by the company. Increasingly you see more WiFi deployments, you see more access points all around, but free WiFi's availability is probably on the decline if you looked at it.

So again in a basic service set we have an access point, and also devices that are connected to that access point. Now a collection of basic service sets that are near each other and readily support handoff from one to the other, meaning devices can go from one to the other and switch which access point they are on, is called an extended service set or an ESS. So if these two BSSs support handoff then they would form an extended service set.

Each access point on the other side of the network is tethered to what's called a backhauling system, and a backhauling system is often an ethernet deployment. Like WiFi ethernet is also an IEEE 802 family member. Remember the 802 part in 802.11 the 802 part is for local area network, so ethernet is a technology for wireline, so that means this part is going to be different because it's wireline instead of wireless, but they are both for local area networks so they both share this 802 in common.

This backhauling system is often provided by either a fiber service, or a cable, or digital subscriber line meaning DSL, so it could be DSL, it could be fiber, it could be cable. And these are all terms that we commonly hear.

The backhauling system is in turn connected to the access network, the access network ultimately provides the access from the WiFi deployment to the rest of the Internet.

To illustrate these terms a bit more clearly, we give a specific example here of WiFi deployment in a home, how it may look. Your wireless devices are going to connect directly to a wireless router, so these being your wireless devices connecting to a wireless router, and a wireless router is a router which has an integrated access point meaning it supports both wireline and wireless communications. So you may also have wired devices connected through ethernet like your desktop computers as well connected to that same WiFi router.

Then the basic service set portion of this forms between the access point in the router and all of your wireless devices in your house. And the wireless router will in tern connect to a modem, which will then in turn connect to the access network. Now between these three devices here a modem, a WiFi router, and an access point, which is within the router, we have technically three separate entities, but more and more even the WiFi router will actually contain all of these, so the modem, the actual router, and the access point will actually be all contained in what we call our home routers.

So if the channel conditions are good, for example, if you're right in your home and you're the only device, you're sitting right next to the WiFi gateway, the data rates can be very impressive, especially if you're using 802.11ac, the newest WiFi standard. It's faster than 4G, it's probably even faster than the cable or fiber access link that connects the residential gateway to the rest of the Internet. So what you're experiencing here between your router and the other devices is actually probably being bottlenecked to some extent by the rest of the connections, even the cable that's connecting out to the rest of the Internet.

But if you sit outside the limited range of the access point, or you start moving across the boundaries of an ESS or move quickly about that, you can get easily disconnected. And if you share the air with ten or so other WiFi devices, the speed can drop substantially. And again that's the question that we will come back to in studying interference in this lecture.